

# A Sacred Well

In the spring of a while ago, during a trip to Ireland, I had the chance to
visit a sacred well. Sacred wells are pilgrimage sites–have been since
pre-Christian Ireland–with the pagan rituals adapting and persisting through new
Christian tradition.

The well was sheltered in a squat, stone hut, its entrance easy to spot by the
amount of ◊em{stuff}– bright, eclectic, dense stuff– crowded around it. The
interior was even more saturated in things, objects of worship (candles, saint's
medals) left behind by a past visitor, or sentimental objects with hinted
significance (a statue of a house, a person's photo in a frame, crutches) given
to the well to focus and amplify the visitor's prayer.

The traditions of the well weren't necessarily my traditions, but I felt the
reverence of the place immediately. I unconsciously took off my hat at the
entrance, walked softly down the passage way, past the candles, photos, toys,
and tightly folded papers holding letters not meant for any human to read.

The friends I was with all grew quiet as well, or rather it was as if a type
of profound quiet filled the place and we all followed its lead.

What was the source of that quiet? The source of the power and energy I felt
there? Was it given out by the well itself, felt fully by the first people to
discover it? Or was it a collaboration, an energy that accumulated with each
person, something left along with their object of intention, a hope trembling
and resonating with the sound of the water and the next believer's words? Were
we feeling that concentrated, intangible belief?


# Power in Place

There are the places and object that feel powerful because I am told they are
powerful, imbued with with belief, tradition, and history. And in these
places, my body responds appropriately-- a reflexive respect that brings my
voice to a whisper in a church, finds me taking off my shoes at the entrance of
a temple, ears pricked up for reverberation in the childhood home of a childhood
hero.

And there are the places and things that hold power for some small, or
inarticulate reason. Or, at least, If i were to try to articualte it, I'd feel
foolish. The one childhood toy I can't let go of, the town I irrationally hate
stopping at when travelling, when an item seems to "call" to me or when one
feels strangely "off". It's as if the things are filled with some energy of the
people before, a loop of time lingering in the space. It's what gives me the
impulse, whenever I move into a new home--no matter how bare, swept, and blank
the new space may be-- to clean it immediately before moving any of my own items
in. What am I cleaning? What invisible thing do I not want mingling with my
own invisible things?



# Time Online 

Today, I don't travel too much to sacred wells in distant places.
I spend a lot of time online. Too much time. It's a place profoundly unquiet, a
pummeling noise and a rush of information that leaves me feeling both hyped up
and melancholy. And it's a place that is hard to stop visiting.

It's a bit corny, at this point, to refer to twitter as 'the hell site'; not
because it isn't true, but because the term is played out. Its hellishness is
self-evident, and people stopped bringing that up years ago.

Whenever I'm in a conversation about social media, it always seems to take the
same arc.

"It is terrible, I don't like it."

"And It's making the world worse!"

"I deleted it off my phone, trying to check it intentionally."

"I should fully delete it, honestly."

"Well, I should say, I just use messenger now."

"Of course, it's the only way to talk to some family."

"Right! And, there is some great stuff on there though."

"Terrible stuff, but really funny too."

"And with everything that happened, it was incredible to see the stories coming
out."

"I have real connections on there, I use it differently, I think. It's the
groups I'm a part of."

"Honestly, it's really important and some people don't have the privilege to
give it up."

"Speaking of, Have you seen this?"

"Oh, that's great, have you seen this?"


We know it's bad, and still something holds us. Something beyond its addictive
design--like a personal attachment we're hesitant to let go of. What have we
left clinging to these spaces?

# Liminal Spaces

Perhaps a part of the sacred well's power came from being a liminal space. It is
both land and water; a visible rush from an invisible source. We humans love
liminal spaces, recognize them as inherently powerful. The rush of emotions that
come at dusk and dawn, the symbolic depth felt when standing on the beach
looking out to the ocean. The electrical chill when someone is gone, but hasn't
yet left.

We are drawn to the inexpressible (or at least I am). The places beyond
articulation. And what pull there is for that which is not one thing or another,
but forever hovering in between.


# Growing online

At one point, I considered the internet separate from the world; an imaginary
boundless place. It's likely because, as a kid, my house had dial-up internet,
and to connect to it required a short ritual with arcane sounds. We also had one
phone line, so the internet could not be in the house continually. It was
something you visited late at night, like catching a distant AM station bouncing
down from the sky.

Now, ironically, the internet is something I have to work to get away from. Dig
deep into phone settings to try to keep it from pestering me about new posts I
missed, or to quell the habit of checking work chat in the bathroom, all
stepping out of the shower to scroll through text messages with wet hands. My
evening ritual is to go intentionally offline, shut down the screens and turn
them away, revisit the simplicity of boredom or a book.

The internet and the web still seem imaginary. We keep up the refrain of "This
is not real life", while the things said and done online have direct, tangible
effects in our lives. We see physical media become odd echos of the online
world, newspaper articles detailing the timeline of a particularly important
twitter thread, controversies about upcoming films revealed to be a manufactured
viral campaign. Each day becomes harder to distinguish what's real, whether
online or off.

And we say it is intangible, yet feel the full physical weight of it. The tics
of phone checks, the tired eyes and slumped shoulders, the racing heart or
dopamine rush of a notifying ping. I setup a timer when on the internet now,
have a buzzer  go off every 25 minutes so I remember to get up and stretch
and let my eyes focus softly on some unlit thing. It is to help slow this
imaginary's worlds real, physical effects on me.

We feel the effects of the web, even if they're hard to describe or seem too
obvious to say. What isn't discussed as much is how much we give back to it.

# Four Sites of Endless Feeling

We've lived with the world wide web for over three decades, and with each year
the amount of places visited online diminishes, while the breadth of activities
we do on them increases considerably. Today, it feels like there's only a
handful of sites, and to these sites w've given the full spectrum of our
emotions.

On sites like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter we post dumb jokes, sincere
fears, theories about the world, our arguments for the existence of God, and
taco truck reviews. We share art, art that no one sees, art that does well, art
that stays on the platform after the artist is gone, leaving an eerily mundane
final post and a now complete media tab. We announce that we're looking for a
new job, network, share (carefuly edited) casual opinions hoping new eyes are
watching, impressed. We interview, announce new work, and subtly change how we
talk to our friends now that all our bosses are watching. We meet each other,
flirt, ask out, catch up, create worlds of inside jokes with bad reposts, corny
memes, and ironic replies. We fuck, we say I love you, we cheat, we break up, we
block. We painfully linger, with one segment of time on a facebook wall filling
us with memory like it's an old, unwashed shirt. and we stay together, share
apartment photos, merge timelines, announce engagements, plan weddings, share
invites, share baby photos, embarass our child online. We rage, we breakdown, we
organize, we ask for help, we witness and grieve, we scream about inustice into
what feels like a void. We intentionally stay quiet, or speak up, or cowardly
pause over the photo of a burger, afraid that liking it now will be uncaring to
the deep pain being posted above and below it. We ask for medical help, for
places to stay, for funding of our video series or for the surgery we
desperately need. We share something ordinary but know that within it we are
really asking for friendship, safety, an audience, change, to hurt, to be
noticed, for someone to step in, for nostalgic pangs and hoped for futures. We
share cat photos.

We post again and again to the same few platforms, some of it private and a lot
of it public, but not necessarily meant for each other to see. It is a
multudinous, inarticulate thing that we want out of all of this and that is
shared, at once, to some big vast other.

# Tangible and Intangible

When a gofundme is posted, what all is shared within it? What all imbues it, as
its signal is boosted and it goes far beyond the original network. When its goal
is reached, and the possibilities open now in the real-world, is it the same
feeling as an answered prayer? Or a digital artifact of an answered prayer? What
feeling lingers in those that don't reach their goals, what energy remains?

When we make a wish to a well, light a candle and speak our hope, what all comes
along with our voice? What changes when the words are typed instead of said?
Where do these words go?

In talking of the offline world, the question remains rhetoric, or at least the
answer is just beyond our reach.

In the online world, you can give a direct, though, incomplete answer. It is
easy to know where the words go, when typed instead of spoken: they go to
servers.

# Servers and Data Centers

The spectrum of feelings we share on a handful of websites all end up travelling
to the same type of place: a server in some distant city owned by this same
handful.

When you message a friend it does not reach them directly. It is passed as a
request to a server beyond either of your control, and this server responds to
your request by, hopefully, passing it along. It will also keep this message
stored, for as long as it needs or wants to, in a data center owned by this
handful.

The message is translated to a language unspoken by us, a language reduced to an
extreme simplicity of 1 and 0, off and on, light and dark. Then it's translated
into energetic charge, recorded into a hard drive's platter as a sequence of
magnetized momemnts. Tiny, physical, but invisible points hold the requested
magnetic charge, this energetic impulse, for as long as needed...for in these
charged and uncharged points lives your words, ready to be recalled again.

What is passed along with everything we post? What all do these data centers
hold? Can our attachment to them come from something beyond addictive ui and a
massive budget...something it'd feel foolish to say aloud? What have we given
them, what power do they now hold? How much of what holds those pinpoints of a
hard drive in place is the words themsleves, and the inexpressible feelings
passed within them?

# Cyberspace

When the web emerged, it was treated as distinct from the real world, like we'd
discovered a second, imaginary earth. John Perry Barlow published the
"Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace", which said so in an official
decree: "Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and
steel, I come from Cyberspace, a new home of Mind...You are not welcome among
us...you have no sovereignty here."

He continued:

"I declare the global social space we are building to be naturally independent
of the tyrannies you seek to impose on us...Cyberspace does not lie within your
borders...it is an act of nature that grows through our collective actions. Your
legal concepts of property, expression, identity, movement, and context do not
apply to us...They are all based on matter, and there is no matter here."

We came to learn, of course, that this was hooey.

The online world is deeply entangled--inseparable--from our "real" world. The
cyber world he describes was, from the start, a military project. The things we
say and do online have a profound effect on our physical lives, and the
infrastructural needs have a profound effect on the natural world in which
cyberspace resides.

It is a compelling illusion to declare this a world with no matter, but it takes
a whole lot of matter to maintain the illusion.

It was once a useful distinction for this place on the internet to be separate
from your place ion the world That you were a different person in "cyberspace"
than in "meatspace". But the distinction makes little sense now, cyberspace is
more a nostalgic signifier than useful term, and "meatspace" is really just for
people who like saying "meat" out loud.

There is no separation. We are all in it together, overlaid and coexisitent.
And, from my view, to declare a space of ideas and the mind to be necessarily
separate from the world, is to deny the world the aliveness and agency it holds.

# Sacred and Profane

I will just say my feelings directly: we have given so much energy and intention
to a handful of centralized platforms, and I think it's become metaphysically
dangerous.

I don't think it's bad that we share what we do and as much as we do. It's
intense and beautiful and human. It's the same feelings we've always had, the
same need to share them, the same draw to inbetween spaces. We are just good at
adaptation. Liminal spaces is now and instagram account and a creepypasta.

It's dangerous because these platforms benefit from the energy held in their
centers, but treat it profanely. Our prayers and wishes are flattened alongside
everythign else, everything categorized as content. We cannot place our desires
into these spaces intentionally. They are cast to a feed and displayed
"algorithimically", which is to say mysteriously-- nestled between ads and banal
recaps of television shows. The amount of time you spend reading a loved one's
post is recorded by the platform to improve your advertising profile, so that
keywords in your friend's update on their sick dog will be used in some future
embedded post to sell you a subscription box for soap.

The data center require nature, but show no respect back to it. These centers
are placed strategically, aware of the power a particular landscape can hold.
They are giant buildings placed in out-of-sight spaces, but still connected to
our grid---giant buildings housing billions of humans posts, placed outside
towns of less than a thousand. Or they are placed in areas where the natural
landscape can help reduce their operating costs, near rivers that can be
directed to help power their cooling systems, or in mountains to protect against
the world-razing war they invariably expect.

There is something simple and pure in all that we share on these sites and the
power that this raises. And there is something simple and direct in how
profanely the platforms desecrate it.

# Another Future

What would happen if we gave as much as we do now, all our vulnerable and
intention-filled requests, but to servers that we owned? Or if we passed our
thoughts directly to one another, amplifying the energy beneath our fingers?

What would happen if we were upfront with the potential energy, the inarticulate
sacred power, that can come from voicing our lives and dreams, and storing the
echoes of this voice...but now it was stored in networks designed to respect,
resonate, and give back to this power?

There is beautiful possibility in decentralized tools because they can be new,
and local, and small. We can create community networks that grow stronger with
each new member, stronger in practical and magical ways, tangible and
intangible. We can have sun-soaked servers, that can be plentiful and small,
held in powerful spots of nature not because of what can be extracted, but
because of what resonates there and what we know can be given back.

We can create tools that are resilient and respectful, respecful of the world
they exist in, the people giving to them, and the streams that passes through it
all. We've felt the tremendous weight of power that profane companies hold over
us. What if we distributed this power among ourselves?

Part of this is poetic metaphor and part of this is me being as literal as I
can, and it can be hard for me to tell sometimes which is which. But that's
alright. I like this liminal space of not knowing.

